README.md, before:

# jquery.event.gevent #

## Summary ##
A plugin that provides the capability to **publish**
a **global custom event**.

It also provides the capability to **subscribe**
a **jQuery collection** and a **function** to a 
**global custom event**.

This plugin is featured in the
book [Single page web applications - JavaScript end-to-end][1].
Methods include **subscribe**, **publish**, and **unsubscribe**.

Jquery 1.8.x and lower supported global custom events.
These were not officially supported and have been completely removed
as of jQuery 1.9. I found this disappointing as I used global events
as a robust mechanism to publish asynchronous changes from my model
to the view.

I wrote this plugin to restore and improve this capability.

## Methods ##

The methods documentation is extracted directly from the plugin source.

### $.gevent.publish ###

    // Example  :
    //   $.gevent.publish(
    //     'spa-model-msg-receive',
    //     [ { user : 'fred', msg : 'Hi gang' } ]
    //   );
    // Purpose  :
    //   Publish an event with an optional list of arguments
    //   which a subscribed handler will receive after the event object.
    // Arguments (positional)
    //   * 0 ( event_name )  - The global event name
    //   * 1 ( data )        - Optional data to be passed as argument(s)
    //                         to subscribed functions. Provide an array for
    //                         multiple arguments.
    // Throws   : none
    // Returns  : none
    //

### $.gevent.subscribe ###

You may **subscribe** a **jQuery collection** and a **function** to a
**global custom event**.

Every time the **custom global event** occurs, the function is invoked
for *each element* of the **jQuery collection**.  The invoked function:

- Always receive the **global event object** as the first argument.
- May receive additional arguments as provided by the **publish** invocation.
- Has `this` bound to the element of the jQuery collection being considered.
  If, for example, we have `$('.msg')`*subscribe* to a *global custom event*,
  the value of `this` in the handler *function* may be the DOM element
  `<div class="msg">`.  If the collection contains 5 elements, the function
  will be invoked 5 times, once for each element in the collection.


    // Example  :
    //   $.gevent.subscribe(
    //     $( '#msg' ),
    //     'spa-msg-receive',
    //     onModelMsgReceive
    //   );
    // Purpose  :
    //   Subscribe a function to a published event on a jQuery collection
    // Arguments (positional)
    //   * 0 ( $collection ) - The jQuery collection on which to bind event
    //   * 1 ( event_name )  - The global event name
    //   * 2 ( fn ) - The function to bound to the event on the collection
    // Throws   : none
    // Returns  : none
    //

### $.gevent.unsubscribe ###

    // BEGIN public method /unsubscribeEvent/
    // Example  :
    //   $.gevent.unsubscribe(
    //     $( '#msg' ),
    //     'spa-model-msg-receive'
    //   );
    // Purpose  :
    //   Remove a binding for the named event on a provided collection
    // Arguments (positional)
    //   * 0 ( $collection ) - The jQuery collection on which to bind event
    //   * 1 ( event_name )  - The global event name
    // Throws   : none
    // Returns  : none
    //

## Deleted DOM elements ##

If we delete DOM elements that had subscriptions, **no** subscribed functions
will be executed for that collection.  **This is desired behavior**

Let's say we want  `<div id='user'/>`, to show a username when a *name-change* event occurs. We can **subscribe** the **collection** `$( '#user' )` and the **function** `onNameChange` to the **global custom event** `name-change` like so:

    $.gevent.subscribe( $( '#user' ), 'name-change', onNameChange );

Now when we publish the 'name-change' event, the `<div id='user/>` exists and so the **function** ( `onNameChange` ) subscribed to the **global custom event** `name-change` iterates over the **jQuery collection** `$( '#user')`, invoking the function for each element.

But later we adjust the page and remove the `$( '#user' )` DOM element, the **function** because the DOM element has been removed.

You may play along at home to see this happen. Let's open the an HTML page that has jQuery 1.9.1 and this plugin loaded (or use JSFiddle.com) and then cut and paste the following into the JavaScript console, one step at a time:

    // 1. Create a div
    $('body').append( '<div id="msg"/>' );

    // 2. Subscribe to an event
    $.gevent.subscribe(
      $( '#msg' ),
      'spa-model-msg-receive',
      function ( event, msg_map ) {
        console.log(
          'message received',
          event,
          msg_map
        );
      }
    );

    // 3. Publish the event
    $.gevent.publish(
      'spa-model-msg-receive',
      [ { user : 'fred', msg : 'Hi gang' } ]
    );

    // 4. We should see output in the JavaScript log

    // 5. Delete the div where the event was subscribed on
    $( '#msg' ).remove();

    // 6. Now republish the event
    $.gevent.publish(
      'spa-model-msg-receive',
      [ { user : 'fred', msg : 'Hi gang' } ]
    );

    // 7. We should not see any output in the console
    //    because the subscribed function is not invoked.

If we add `<div id='msg'/>` to the DOM after this example, we will need to resubscribe to the event if we want it to respond as before.

## Example ##

Let's say we display various panels in our web page that show how many widgets Acme Inc. has manufactured and rejected on a given day. We occassionally receive a messages from Acme's web service that tells us the revised widget reject count.

With this plugin we can simply *publish* a `widget-reject` event and have all the panels update themselves:

    // function to update reject panels
    var onWidgetReject = function ( event, reject_count ) {
      $( this ).text( reject_count );
    };

    // collection of all panels in our page
    var $panels = $( '.widget-reject-panel' );

    // subscribe to the 'widget-reject' event
    $.gevent.subscribe( $panels, 'widget-reject', onWidgetReject );

    // publish the event (we now have 23 rejects)
    $.gevent.publish( 'widget-reject', 23 );

This pub-sub mechanism is elegant and easy to create and maintain. We can add or subtract panels at will.  Events published by a controller may be used by many other modules without the tedium and tangle of callbacks. We have found it invaluable when building scalable Single Page web Applications (SPAs).

## More Examples ##

### Subscribe to an event on '#msg' div ###

    $.gevent.subscribe(
      $( '#msg' ),             // jQuery selection
      'spa-model-msg-receive', // Event name
      onModelMsgReceive        // Handler function
    );

### Publish an event ###

    $.gevent.publish(
      'spa-model-msg-receive',
      [ { user : 'fred', msg : 'Hi gang' } ]
    );

### Unsubscribe from event on the '#msg' div ###

    $.gevent.unsubscribe(
      $( '#msg' ),         // jQuery selection
      'spa-model-msg-receive', // Event name
    );

## Other notes ##

This is a global jQuery plugin, and therefore does not offer chaining. For example:

    // DOES NOT WORK:
    //   $.gevent.subscribe(
    //     $( '#msg' ),
    //     'spa-msg-receive',
    //     onModelMsgReceive
    //   ).gevent.trigger( ... );
    //

Sorry about that :)

## Error handling ##

Like many other plugins, this code does not throw exceptions. Instead, it does its work quietly. For example, you may "publish" an event that has no subscribers, although by definition nothing will receive it. Or if you publish an event and pass in something besides an array of arguments, it will convert the variable into an array of one.


## Avoid complex 'SPA framework' libraries ##

jQuery used with this and a few other well-chosen tools forms
a fantastic basis for a lean, easy to use SPA architecture
as detailed in [Single page web applications, JavaScript end-to-end][1].
Here are the recommended tools:

| Capability   | Tool                | Notes                             |
| ------------ | ------------------- | ----------------------------------|
| Websockets   | [Socket.io][6]      | Prefer websockets over AJAX.      |
| AJAX         | jQuery native       | Use jQuery AJAX methods.          |
| Promises     | jQuery native       | Use jQuery promise methods.       |
| Model Events | [Global Events][2]  | jQuery plugin eliminates having   |
|              |                     | to manage multiple event types.   |
| Touch        | [Unified events][3] | Unify desktop and touch events.   |
| Routing      | [uriAnchor][4]      | jQuery plugin for robust routing. |
|              |                     | Includes support for dependent    |
|              |                     | and independent query arguments.  |
| Data Model   | [taffyDB][5]        | A powerful and flexible SQL-like  |
|              |                     | client data management tool.      |
| SVG          | [D3][7]             | Great for easy graphs and charts  |
|              | [SVG][8]            | Low-level jQuery plugin           |
| Templates    | [Dust][9]           | Uses a powerful template DSL that |
|              |                     | minimizes chances to intemingle   |
|              |                     | business and display logic.       |

This suite of tools has all the capabilities of a bleeding-edge
SPA "framework" library within the reliable and mature jQuery ecosystem.
It can provide an application that is significantly more flexible and
testable since display logic can easily be decoupled from business logic.
Finally, it leverages jQuery's maturity, performance, and excellent
tools instead of competing with them.

## Release Notes ##

### Copyright (c) ###
2013-2015 Michael S. Mikowski (mike[dot]mikowski[at]gmail[dotcom])

### License ###
Dual licensed under the MIT or GPL Version 2
http://jquery.org/license

### Versions 0.1.0 - 0.1.5 ###
This is the first release.  The reason there are multiple version
numbers is I was getting up to speed on the jQuery plugin site.

### Version 0.1.6 ###
Allows passing non-array data as second argument to publish.
When this occurs, the data variable is used as the second argument
(after the event object) to the subscribed functions.

### Versions 0.1.7-10 ###
Changed manifests for jQuery plugin registry.

### Version 0.2.0 ###
Updated publish events so that falsie values (undefined, null, blank, 0)
may be published as arguments.

### Versions 1.0.2-3 ###
Reversed a negative if-else statement (easier to understand); updated tags to
publish updates to jQuery plugins site.  Fixed documentation typos and listed
this as part of the SPA stack.

### Versions 1.1.0 ###
Updated documentation.

### Testing ###
I have tested with jQuery 1.7.2, 1.9.1, and 2. You may check out the test
HTML page to see this in action. Make sure you have your JavaScript console open.

## See also ##

The [multicast plugin](http://plugins.jquery.com/multicast/).

## TODO ##

- Investigate out-of-date collections and remove them from the
  plugin session storage. This can be done by looping through
  collections and checking `$collection.closest( 'body' ).length >= 1`.

- Consider a resubscribe method.

- Consider only allowing a collection subscribe a function to an event
  only once, at least as an option.

- Other kinds of garbage collection could use some consideration.

## Contribute! ##

If you want to help out, like all jQuery plugins this is hosted at
GitHub.  Any improvements or suggestions are welcome!
You can reach me at mike[dot]mikowski[at]gmail[dotcom].

## END ##

[1]:http://manning.com/mikowski
[2]:https://github.com/mmikowski/jquery.event.gevent
[3]:https://github.com/mmikowski/jquery.event.ue
[4]:https://github.com/mmikowski/urianchor
[5]:https://github.com/typicaljoe/taffydb
[6]:http://socket.io
[7]:https://github.com/mbostock/d3
[8]:http://keith-wood.name/svg.html
[9]:http://linkedin.github.io/dustjs

Commit message:

Updated to 1.1.1 with jquery keywords

README.md, after:

# jquery.event.gevent #

## Summary ##
A plugin that provides the capability to **publish**
a **global custom event**.

It also provides the capability to **subscribe**
a **jQuery collection** and a **function** to a 
**global custom event**.

This plugin is featured in the
book [Single page web applications - JavaScript end-to-end][1].
Methods include **subscribe**, **publish**, and **unsubscribe**.

Jquery 1.8.x and lower supported global custom events.
These were not officially supported and have been completely removed
as of jQuery 1.9. I found this disappointing as I used global events
as a robust mechanism to publish asynchronous changes from my model
to the view.

I wrote this plugin to restore and improve this capability.

## Methods ##

The methods documentation is extracted directly from the plugin source.

### $.gevent.publish ###

    // Example  :
    //   $.gevent.publish(
    //     'spa-model-msg-receive',
    //     [ { user : 'fred', msg : 'Hi gang' } ]
    //   );
    // Purpose  :
    //   Publish an event with an optional list of arguments
    //   which a subscribed handler will receive after the event object.
    // Arguments (positional)
    //   * 0 ( event_name )  - The global event name
    //   * 1 ( data )        - Optional data to be passed as argument(s)
    //                         to subscribed functions. Provide an array for
    //                         multiple arguments.
    // Throws   : none
    // Returns  : none
    //

### $.gevent.subscribe ###

You may **subscribe** a **jQuery collection** and a **function** to a
**global custom event**.

Every time the **custom global event** occurs, the function is invoked
for *each element* of the **jQuery collection**.  The invoked function:

- Always receive the **global event object** as the first argument.
- May receive additional arguments as provided by the **publish** invocation.
- Has `this` bound to the element of the jQuery collection being considered.
  If, for example, we have `$('.msg')`*subscribe* to a *global custom event*,
  the value of `this` in the handler *function* may be the DOM element
  `<div class="msg">`.  If the collection contains 5 elements, the function
  will be invoked 5 times, once for each element in the collection.


    // Example  :
    //   $.gevent.subscribe(
    //     $( '#msg' ),
    //     'spa-msg-receive',
    //     onModelMsgReceive
    //   );
    // Purpose  :
    //   Subscribe a function to a published event on a jQuery collection
    // Arguments (positional)
    //   * 0 ( $collection ) - The jQuery collection on which to bind event
    //   * 1 ( event_name )  - The global event name
    //   * 2 ( fn ) - The function to bound to the event on the collection
    // Throws   : none
    // Returns  : none
    //

### $.gevent.unsubscribe ###

    // BEGIN public method /unsubscribeEvent/
    // Example  :
    //   $.gevent.unsubscribe(
    //     $( '#msg' ),
    //     'spa-model-msg-receive'
    //   );
    // Purpose  :
    //   Remove a binding for the named event on a provided collection
    // Arguments (positional)
    //   * 0 ( $collection ) - The jQuery collection on which to bind event
    //   * 1 ( event_name )  - The global event name
    // Throws   : none
    // Returns  : none
    //

## Deleted DOM elements ##

If we delete DOM elements that had subscriptions, **no** subscribed functions
will be executed for that collection.  **This is desired behavior**

Let's say we want  `<div id='user'/>`, to show a username when a *name-change* event occurs. We can **subscribe** the **collection** `$( '#user' )` and the **function** `onNameChange` to the **global custom event** `name-change` like so:

    $.gevent.subscribe( $( '#user' ), 'name-change', onNameChange );

Now when we publish the 'name-change' event, the `<div id='user/>` exists and so the **function** ( `onNameChange` ) subscribed to the **global custom event** `name-change` iterates over the **jQuery collection** `$( '#user')`, invoking the function for each element.

But later we adjust the page and remove the `$( '#user' )` DOM element, the **function** because the DOM element has been removed.

You may play along at home to see this happen. Let's open the an HTML page that has jQuery 1.9.1 and this plugin loaded (or use JSFiddle.com) and then cut and paste the following into the JavaScript console, one step at a time:

    // 1. Create a div
    $('body').append( '<div id="msg"/>' );

    // 2. Subscribe to an event
    $.gevent.subscribe(
      $( '#msg' ),
      'spa-model-msg-receive',
      function ( event, msg_map ) {
        console.log(
          'message received',
          event,
          msg_map
        );
      }
    );

    // 3. Publish the event
    $.gevent.publish(
      'spa-model-msg-receive',
      [ { user : 'fred', msg : 'Hi gang' } ]
    );

    // 4. We should see output in the JavaScript log

    // 5. Delete the div where the event was subscribed on
    $( '#msg' ).remove();

    // 6. Now republish the event
    $.gevent.publish(
      'spa-model-msg-receive',
      [ { user : 'fred', msg : 'Hi gang' } ]
    );

    // 7. We should not see any output in the console
    //    because the subscribed function is not invoked.

If we add `<div id='msg'/>` to the DOM after this example, we will need to resubscribe to the event if we want it to respond as before.

## Example ##

Let's say we display various panels in our web page that show how many widgets Acme Inc. has manufactured and rejected on a given day. We occassionally receive a messages from Acme's web service that tells us the revised widget reject count.

With this plugin we can simply *publish* a `widget-reject` event and have all the panels update themselves:

    // function to update reject panels
    var onWidgetReject = function ( event, reject_count ) {
      $( this ).text( reject_count );
    };

    // collection of all panels in our page
    var $panels = $( '.widget-reject-panel' );

    // subscribe to the 'widget-reject' event
    $.gevent.subscribe( $panels, 'widget-reject', onWidgetReject );

    // publish the event (we now have 23 rejects)
    $.gevent.publish( 'widget-reject', 23 );

This pub-sub mechanism is elegant and easy to create and maintain. We can add or subtract panels at will.  Events published by a controller may be used by many other modules without the tedium and tangle of callbacks. We have found it invaluable when building scalable Single Page web Applications (SPAs).

## More Examples ##

### Subscribe to an event on '#msg' div ###

    $.gevent.subscribe(
      $( '#msg' ),             // jQuery selection
      'spa-model-msg-receive', // Event name
      onModelMsgReceive        // Handler function
    );

### Publish an event ###

    $.gevent.publish(
      'spa-model-msg-receive',
      [ { user : 'fred', msg : 'Hi gang' } ]
    );

### Unsubscribe from event on the '#msg' div ###

    $.gevent.unsubscribe(
      $( '#msg' ),         // jQuery selection
      'spa-model-msg-receive', // Event name
    );

## Other notes ##

This is a global jQuery plugin, and therefore does not offer chaining. For example:

    // DOES NOT WORK:
    //   $.gevent.subscribe(
    //     $( '#msg' ),
    //     'spa-msg-receive',
    //     onModelMsgReceive
    //   ).gevent.trigger( ... );
    //

Sorry about that :)

## Error handling ##

Like many other plugins, this code does not throw exceptions. Instead, it does its work quietly. For example, you may "publish" an event that has no subscribers, although by definition nothing will receive it. Or if you publish an event and pass in something besides an array of arguments, it will convert the variable into an array of one.


## Avoid complex 'SPA framework' libraries ##

jQuery used with this and a few other well-chosen tools forms
a fantastic basis for a lean, easy to use SPA architecture
as detailed in [Single page web applications, JavaScript end-to-end][1].
Here are the recommended tools:

| Capability   | Tool                | Notes                             |
| ------------ | ------------------- | ----------------------------------|
| Websockets   | [Socket.io][6]      | Prefer websockets over AJAX.      |
| AJAX         | jQuery native       | Use jQuery AJAX methods.          |
| Promises     | jQuery native       | Use jQuery promise methods.       |
| Model Events | [Global Events][2]  | jQuery plugin eliminates having   |
|              |                     | to manage multiple event types.   |
| Touch        | [Unified events][3] | Unify desktop and touch events.   |
| Routing      | [uriAnchor][4]      | jQuery plugin for robust routing. |
|              |                     | Includes support for dependent    |
|              |                     | and independent query arguments.  |
| Data Model   | [taffyDB][5]        | A powerful and flexible SQL-like  |
|              |                     | client data management tool.      |
| SVG          | [D3][7]             | Great for easy graphs and charts  |
|              | [SVG][8]            | Low-level jQuery plugin           |
| Templates    | [Dust][9]           | Uses a powerful template DSL that |
|              |                     | minimizes chances to intemingle   |
|              |                     | business and display logic.       |

This suite of tools has all the capabilities of a bleeding-edge
SPA "framework" library within the reliable and mature jQuery ecosystem.
It can provide an application that is significantly more flexible and
testable since display logic can easily be decoupled from business logic.
Finally, it leverages jQuery's maturity, performance, and excellent
tools instead of competing with them.

## Release Notes ##

### Copyright (c) ###
2013-2015 Michael S. Mikowski (mike[dot]mikowski[at]gmail[dotcom])

### License ###
Dual licensed under the MIT or GPL Version 2
http://jquery.org/license

### Versions 0.1.0 - 0.1.5 ###
This is the first release.  The reason there are multiple version
numbers is I was getting up to speed on the jQuery plugin site.

### Version 0.1.6 ###
Allows passing non-array data as second argument to publish.
When this occurs, the data variable is used as the second argument
(after the event object) to the subscribed functions.

### Versions 0.1.7-10 ###
Changed manifests for jQuery plugin registry.

### Version 0.2.0 ###
Updated publish events so that falsie values (undefined, null, blank, 0)
may be published as arguments.

### Versions 1.0.2-3 ###
Reversed a negative if-else statement (easier to understand); updated tags to
publish updates to jQuery plugins site.  Fixed documentation typos and listed
this as part of the SPA stack.

### Versions 1.1.0 ###
Updated documentation.

### Versions 1.1.1 ###
Add keywords for jquery-plugin and environment:jquery

### Testing ###
I have tested with jQuery 1.7.2, 1.9.1, and 2. You may check out the test
HTML page to see this in action. Make sure you have your JavaScript console open.

## See also ##

The [multicast plugin](http://plugins.jquery.com/multicast/).

## TODO ##

- Investigate out-of-date collections and remove them from the
  plugin session storage. This can be done by looping through
  collections and checking `$collection.closest( 'body' ).length >= 1`.

- Consider a resubscribe method.

- Consider only allowing a collection subscribe a function to an event
  only once, at least as an option.

- Other kinds of garbage collection could use some consideration.

## Contribute! ##

If you want to help out, like all jQuery plugins this is hosted at
GitHub.  Any improvements or suggestions are welcome!
You can reach me at mike[dot]mikowski[at]gmail[dotcom].

## END ##

[1]:http://manning.com/mikowski
[2]:https://github.com/mmikowski/jquery.event.gevent
[3]:https://github.com/mmikowski/jquery.event.ue
[4]:https://github.com/mmikowski/urianchor
[5]:https://github.com/typicaljoe/taffydb
[6]:http://socket.io
[7]:https://github.com/mbostock/d3
[8]:http://keith-wood.name/svg.html
[9]:http://linkedin.github.io/dustjs
